README.md, before:

# Sprint Challenge: RDBMS and SQL - Projects & Actions

This challenge allows you to practice the concepts and techniques learned over the past Sprint and apply them in a concrete project. This Sprint explored Adding Data Persistence to Web API's and you were taught the following modules: Introduction to Relational Databases and SQL, Inserting and Modifying Data, Querying Data; Migrations and Seeds and Introduction to Data Modeling. In your challenge for this Sprint, you will demonstrate proficiency by creating an application that uses ReactJS to consume live data retrieved from the World Wide Web.

## Instructions

**Read these instructions carefully. Understand exactly what is expected _before_ starting this Sprint Challenge.**

This is an individual assessment. All work must be your own. Your challenge score is a measure of your ability to work independently using the material covered through this sprint. You need to demonstrate proficiency in the concepts and objectives introduced and practiced in preceding days.

You are not allowed to collaborate during the Sprint Challenge. However, you are encouraged to follow the twenty-minute rule and seek support from your PM and Instructor in your cohort help channel on Slack. Your work reflects your proficiency Adding Data Persistence to Web APIs and your command of the concepts and techniques in the Introduction to Relational Databases and SQL, Inserting and Modifying Data, Querying Data; Migrations and Seeds and Introduction to Data Modeling modules.

You have three hours to complete this challenge. Plan your time accordingly.

## Commits

Commit your code regularly and meaningfully. This helps both you (in case you ever need to return to old code for any number of reasons and your project manager.

## Description

In this challenge, you build an application that lets users track `Projects` and `Actions` in the spirit of David Allen's _Getting Things Done (GTD)_ methodology.

Use _Node.js_, _Express.js_ and _Knex_ to build a RESTful API for a `Project Tracker` application that persists data to a _SQLite_ database.

This will be akin to the Web API that you built in the last sprint, only this time, you'll be writing the persistence layer.

## Self-Study/Essay Questions

Demonstrate your understanding of this week's concepts by answering the following free-form questions. Edit this document to include your answers after each question. Make sure to leave a blank line above and below your answer so it is clear and easy to read by your project manager.

1. Explain the difference between `RDBMS` and `SQL`.
1. Why do tables need a `primary key`?
1. What is the name given to a table column that references the primary key on another table.
1. What do we need in order to have a _many to many_ relationship between two tables.

## Minimum Viable Product

**NOTE** There is no boilerplate for you for this project. You will need to take the steps necessary for creating this project from scratch. Start by initializing your project with a `package.json` file and go from there.

- [ ] A `project` can contain multiple actions and has:
  - [ ] a unique Id.
  - [ ] a name.
  - [ ] a description.
  - [ ] a flag that indicates if the project is complete or not.
- [ ] An `action` belongs to only one project. An action has:
  - [ ] a unique id.
  - [ ] a description of what needs to be done.
  - [ ] a notes column to add additional information.
  - [ ] a flag that indicates if the action has been completed.

Feel free to name the tables and fields anything you want. **Add relationships** as you see fit.

### Tasks

- [ ] Build the database and tables using knex migrations. **Seeding is not needed**.
- [ ] Build the API with the following endpoints:

  - [ ] POST for adding projects.
  - [ ] POST for adding actions.
  - [ ] GET for retrieving a `project` by its `id` that returns an object with the following structure:

    ```js
    {
      id: 1,
      name: 'project name here',
      description: 'the project description',
      completed: false, // or true, the database will return 1 for true and 0 for false
      actions: [
        {
          id: 1,
          description: 'action description',
          notes: 'the action notes',
          completed: false // or true
        },
        {
          id: 7,
          description: 'another action description',
          notes: 'the action notes',
          completed: false // or true
        }
      ]
    }
    ```

## Stretch Problem

This section is **optional** and not counted towards MVP. Start working on it after you're done with the main assignment.

Add the remaining CRUD operations for projects and actions.

Use `knext` to add _data seeding_ scripts for projects and actions.

Add support for the concept of `contexts`. A context is something like _at home_, _at work_ or _at computer_. The idea is that some actions require one or more `contexts` in order to be worked on. For example, the action of _file income taxes_ may require that you are _at home_, _at computer_ and _online_ so if you are _at work_ and look at the list of pending actions you could do in your current context, filing your taxes will not be one of them.

A `context` can be applied to more than one `action`. An action can be tied to more than one context, like in the example above.

When retrieving an `action` by _id_, add a property that lists all the `contexts` related to that action.

**Remember to run `npm init -y` to generate a _package.json_ before adding your dependencies.**

_Good luck and have fun!_

Commit message:

All questions done, with answers provided. will start the pushing and commiting process now, and then take a 5 min break.

README.md, after:

# Sprint Challenge: RDBMS and SQL - Projects & Actions

This challenge allows you to practice the concepts and techniques learned over the past Sprint and apply them in a concrete project. This Sprint explored Adding Data Persistence to Web API's and you were taught the following modules: Introduction to Relational Databases and SQL, Inserting and Modifying Data, Querying Data; Migrations and Seeds and Introduction to Data Modeling. In your challenge for this Sprint, you will demonstrate proficiency by creating an application that uses ReactJS to consume live data retrieved from the World Wide Web.

## Instructions

**Read these instructions carefully. Understand exactly what is expected _before_ starting this Sprint Challenge.**

This is an individual assessment. All work must be your own. Your challenge score is a measure of your ability to work independently using the material covered through this sprint. You need to demonstrate proficiency in the concepts and objectives introduced and practiced in preceding days.

You are not allowed to collaborate during the Sprint Challenge. However, you are encouraged to follow the twenty-minute rule and seek support from your PM and Instructor in your cohort help channel on Slack. Your work reflects your proficiency Adding Data Persistence to Web APIs and your command of the concepts and techniques in the Introduction to Relational Databases and SQL, Inserting and Modifying Data, Querying Data; Migrations and Seeds and Introduction to Data Modeling modules.

You have three hours to complete this challenge. Plan your time accordingly.

## Commits

Commit your code regularly and meaningfully. This helps both you (in case you ever need to return to old code for any number of reasons and your project manager.

## Description

In this challenge, you build an application that lets users track `Projects` and `Actions` in the spirit of David Allen's _Getting Things Done (GTD)_ methodology.

Use _Node.js_, _Express.js_ and _Knex_ to build a RESTful API for a `Project Tracker` application that persists data to a _SQLite_ database.

This will be akin to the Web API that you built in the last sprint, only this time, you'll be writing the persistence layer.

## Self-Study/Essay Questions

Demonstrate your understanding of this week's concepts by answering the following free-form questions. Edit this document to include your answers after each question. Make sure to leave a blank line above and below your answer so it is clear and easy to read by your project manager.

1. Explain the difference between `RDBMS` and `SQL`.
   RDBMS, which stands for Relational DataBase Management Systems, is by far the most popular database management system globally, regardless of how much hate might be thrown its way. The relational part is simply a nod towards the mathamatical idea of tabling data.

SQL, or structured query language, is the language we use to manage databases, communicate with them, and overall make them work. Almost all RDBMS support SQL, which makes this combination of technologies the de facto core techs one must learn to begin to work with databases, which is why we are spending an agonizing month learning how to work with it. Cool beans.

1. Why do tables need a `primary key`?

Tables need a primary key because without one, how can we figure out one "Mark Carpenter" from another "Mark Carpenter"? We need something unique between them or we will never know which one to give a raise to, or give a bus pass to, or whatever. A unique id, a unique SOMETHING, is what we use as a primary key. At times, all we need to give them a interatable number that will not be repeat (like #1, #2, and so on).

1. What is the name given to a table column that references the primary key on another table.
   That would be the `foreign key`. With this, we can have something that points to another table that has a `primary key`. Make sure make the `foreign key` a unique key for one to one relationships! lol.

1. What do we need in order to have a _many to many_ relationship between two tables.

Ooh, slightly trickier. For this, we need a THIRD table that holds a bunch of foreign keys that point to a `primary key` in the other corresponding tables. Nifty. I need more time to play around with this concept, but it seems very powerful, and a great analog to other engineering systems that I have to break down in my side projects.

## Minimum Viable Product

**NOTE** There is no boilerplate for you for this project. You will need to take the steps necessary for creating this project from scratch. Start by initializing your project with a `package.json` file and go from there.

- [ ] A `project` can contain multiple actions and has:
  - [ ] a unique Id.
  - [ ] a name.
  - [ ] a description.
  - [ ] a flag that indicates if the project is complete or not.
- [ ] An `action` belongs to only one project. An action has:
  - [ ] a unique id.
  - [ ] a description of what needs to be done.
  - [ ] a notes column to add additional information.
  - [ ] a flag that indicates if the action has been completed.

Feel free to name the tables and fields anything you want. **Add relationships** as you see fit.

### Tasks

- [ ] Build the database and tables using knex migrations. **Seeding is not needed**.
- [ ] Build the API with the following endpoints:

  - [ ] POST for adding projects.
  - [ ] POST for adding actions.
  - [ ] GET for retrieving a `project` by its `id` that returns an object with the following structure:

    ```js
    {
      id: 1,
      name: 'project name here',
      description: 'the project description',
      completed: false, // or true, the database will return 1 for true and 0 for false
      actions: [
        {
          id: 1,
          description: 'action description',
          notes: 'the action notes',
          completed: false // or true
        },
        {
          id: 7,
          description: 'another action description',
          notes: 'the action notes',
          completed: false // or true
        }
      ]
    }
    ```

## Stretch Problem

This section is **optional** and not counted towards MVP. Start working on it after you're done with the main assignment.

Add the remaining CRUD operations for projects and actions.

Use `knext` to add _data seeding_ scripts for projects and actions.

Add support for the concept of `contexts`. A context is something like _at home_, _at work_ or _at computer_. The idea is that some actions require one or more `contexts` in order to be worked on. For example, the action of _file income taxes_ may require that you are _at home_, _at computer_ and _online_ so if you are _at work_ and look at the list of pending actions you could do in your current context, filing your taxes will not be one of them.

A `context` can be applied to more than one `action`. An action can be tied to more than one context, like in the example above.

When retrieving an `action` by _id_, add a property that lists all the `contexts` related to that action.

**Remember to run `npm init -y` to generate a _package.json_ before adding your dependencies.**

_Good luck and have fun!_
